[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
I have often asked,
where are the
great philosophers,
now that we really,
really need them?
And I've often thought, probably
reincarnated on Wall Street
after starving to death in their
past life as a philosopher.
Or maybe not--
Tim Freke is a
modern-day philosopher.
And he is making the bigger
vision of who and what we are
as human beings both
entertaining and approachable,
because we cannot afford to
continue avoiding looking
at what we are and what
we're contributing to life,
to this planet,
and to the cosmos.
We've got to start
looking at ourselves,
looking at our motives, and
that's what you guys are paid--
or not paid--
to do.
>>TIM FREKE: Yeah.
Ultimately, everything comes
from what we think this is.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
But nobody's really
thinking about that
except the philosophers.
>>FREKE: I know.
>>REGINA: When my son chose
to major in philosophy,
everyone else was so
oh, I'm so sorry, right,
knowing he'd starve to death.
But you know what?
We need philosophers
right now to really start
considering what the stage of
our evolution is as a species
and what we can do with this,
where we can go with it.
And that's really what you're
charging yourself with.
>>FREKE: Absolutely.
It feels like a
lot of people feel
that humanity's lost its way--
>>REGINA: It has--
>>FREKE: And I-- yeah,
because the choice on offer
traditionally now or it has been
between religion, which often
seems irrational, outdated.
It's kind of we don't
think the universe was
collated in seven days anymore.
We've done that.
And then we've got this
new thing, science,
which is so powerful
but literally soulless.
It doesn't speak to the
meaning of what life is.
>>REGINA: It doesn't
speak to anyone's heart.
>>FREKE: It doesn't.
I have a huge respect for
it, but it only goes so far.
And then we're
looking for what's
going to fill that
hole in the middle.
And I've been exploring
spirituality all my life,
from a very young age.
And as I've got older,
I've wondered, how can we
get to the essence of this and
then frame it in such a way
that it doesn't become
on the edges of culture?
It can come right
into the middle,
and it can speak to science.
So scientific knowledge
of spiritual wisdom
can become part of
one thing, rather than
seemingly in opposition.
>>REGINA: Right.
And there are a number of
people, aside from yourself,
who are also charging
themselves with this.
And we need an army
of philosophers
that can speak the language
of any different demographic
and to each culture
of the world.
So there are many
ways to frame this.
>>FREKE: Not only
many ways to frame it,
but also, it's not easy.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: That's why
it hasn't been done.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: Go back to Einstein
and great scientists,
Niels Bohr, the people who've
created modern science.
And they also felt that
bringing these two things
together was the great
intellectual challenge
of our time, because
it would completely
change how we see reality and
then how we live our lives.
But it's not easy to do.
There are challenges
to make it happen.
>>REGINA: It's not easy to do.
And so now we're
in an environment--
I interviewed Rupert
Sheldrake about a year ago.
>>FREKE: Great example.
>>REGINA: Yeah, he's
a good example of it.
And in the newest
book he had written,
we were talking
about the statistics
in it, that the world is now--
England, in
particular, but also,
actually surprisingly,
the US less so.
But all of the Western
world is really now
in a state of majority atheist.
>>FREKE: Definitely.
>>REGINA: And in England,
I think it's only--
oh gosh, it's something
like 80%, 85%.
>>FREKE: Definitely--
>>REGINA: Which is interesting.
>>FREKE: I'm
optimistic about that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And when I say
"atheism," I'm not
talking about going back
to fundamental religions.
>>FREKE: It's secular.
>>REGINA: It's secular.
And there's no purchase
in anything unseen.
Basically, it's more based
on scientific materialism,
although there is a kind
of spirituality that
can emerge alongside it
and can rise out of it.
But mostly, it's a materialistic
engagement with life.
>>FREKE: There's massive
wonder in science.
And there are lots
of TV programs--
in England, Brian
Cox and people like
this-- who are looking
at the universe
and go, look at the wonder.
Look at the wonder.
And god, it is wonderful.
But the small print with
that philosophy is oh,
but by the way,
you're a clever monkey
clinging to a rock
for a few short years.
>>REGINA: And all
this is random.
>>FREKE: And then there's
no purpose to your life,
and you're gone.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: So that's a
very, very bleak view--
>>REGINA: It's very bleak--
>>FREKE: Which pushes
people into a kind
of short-term materialism.
>>REGINA: Yes, and which I
think is where we are right now.
>>FREKE: It is.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: But because I'm an
evolutionist, I think it's OK.
I think what's happening is
that this very limited but deep
materialist science has cleared
away a previous phase, where
we were superstitious
and irrational.
And it's true because it's in
the book and all that stuff.
So that's cleared
away, especially not
so much in the US but
definitely Europe.
And then it doesn't stop there.
Now, what we need
is the next phase.
And what I think can come next
is a rational spirituality.
And by "rational."
I just mean that it's
actually trans-rational.
It embraces thinking clearly.
>>REGINA: You mean "explicable."
>>FREKE: Yeah.
It thinks clearly.
It asks questions,
and it believes
things for good reasons.
>>REGINA: But you almost have to
go through that painful process
of living through the
vacuum and finding out
how empty it is to just keep
filling our life with more
stuff.
>>FREKE: That's
what's happening.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: And what
I see in the States
is that you have all of it.
You've still got the kind
of mythic religious stage.
>>REGINA: Huge fundamentalism.
>>FREKE: Yeah, all
of that stronger
than we have it,
because it was involved
in forming the country.
And then there's this
wonderful secular science.
We're leading the world.
And then there's this
other thing growing,
particularly here, which is this
thoughtful, deep spirituality,
which I think's the future.
I think this is coming.
>>REGINA: How is this
happening for you in England?
How do people respond?
>>FREKE: We have less of the
problem of fundamentalism,
and we have less of the
new thing coming through.
Or how do they respond?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
How do they respond to you,
to these messages in England
and Europe in particular?
>>FREKE: For my own experiences,
I have a fantastic response.
And I believe that is because
what I try to do is honor--
I'm not putting down science.
I'm going, look,
there's something more.
And if I do it in a
clear way and I do it
in a way which makes sense to
people's actual experience,
people pick up on it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: And what I'm
loving is especially
sharing that with young people.
Often, people are
scientists, young scientists,
who are going, actually,
what you're saying,
that actually makes sense.
And that's really exciting.
>>REGINA: Do you find that
in dealing with a younger
generation that is now coming up
through the educational system
and so forth,
millennials and younger,
there is a different type
of language or yearning
that's occurring that really
is almost becoming more
heart-centered, being driven
by a more heart-centered need
to connect, to connect
not just the pieces,
but also to connect
with each other,
to connect with the planet,
just more heart-centered?
>>FREKE: Yeah.
People often--
mistakenly, in my view--
see the growth of social
media and the internet
as about lack of connection.
I'm looking at it with
the young people I know,
and they're totally connected.
They're connected
when they're together.
They're connected when
they're not together.
They're just connected.
And it feels like, oh, we're
entering the age of connection.
Well, actually, we're in it.
And if we can understand
it well enough,
if we can articulate these
deep perennial spiritual truths
in a new way for our own
time, then I think very soon,
this new thing will
start to emerge.
My own feeling--
maybe it's too much.
I don't know.
But my own intuition,
for what it's worth,
is that this new
understanding that's
coming, that I'm trying to be
a part of and so many of us,
I think it will
be as big a shift
for human culture as
the evolution of science
was 400 years ago.
>>REGINA: I should think so.
>>REGINA: And if you look back
now and imagine taking Isaac
Newton or any of those founding
individuals of that and showing
them this--
the internet, Gaia TV, me
flying in in a great big metal
box from England across
the Atlantic Ocean--
these are unthinkable things,
which we take for granted.
And I think that a
bigger jump will come.
But it's not going to
be about technology.
That's a continuation
of the old thing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: It's going
to be about what
we see this is, what we
see life actually is,
and what we see death is and
what we see meaning is about.
These are the things
I think will just
transform our vision of
what it is to be human.
And then once that changes,
our behavior will change.
And then a whole
new world opens up.
>>REGINA: Yes, because
the underpinnings of it
is to begin exploring the
true nature of reality,
but understanding it from a
psychospiritual point of view,
the true nature of reality and
how all of this comes together
and functions and
works to begin with,
which takes an incredibly
open mind, meaning people
have to start really cutting
from the dogma of both science
and religion to be
able to be free enough
to bring those parts together.
And that's the problem we've
had so far is dogmatism.
And we've just
been experiencing,
as we go through this really
critical point, a little
more dogmatism lately on
both sides, drawing apart.
>>FREKE: I've been recently
with some absolutely the
top neuroscientists.
And it's shocking at how
unsophisticated philosophically
they are, even though
they're brilliant scientists.
And the job has to be--
I feel like my job
in the middle here
is I'm asking science to keep
its essence, but to change.
And I'm asking spirituality to
keep its essence and to change.
And then I think we
can hold this together
with the biggest idea I think
that human beings have had
ever, which is
this understanding,
we now have that the whole
universe has evolved.
That's the foundation, I think,
to bring everything together.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
And to that point, when
you're talking about some
of the new science
coming out, I experienced
something that was a really
wonderfully bridging experience
between the world of science
and the world of spirituality.
And it's a new technology
that a woman, who's
deeply spiritual but she's
an Italian neuroscientist,
created technology,
just a device,
like a lot of
neuromodulation devices.
But it's more refined.
And it operates
faster in real time.
And so as I'm going
through these little games,
I had a little headset on.
You're using your
mind-- it's wireless--
to play with your
computer screen
and change the reality on
the screen with your mind.
And it's happening in real time.
But what I noticed was the only
things that actually spiked
your levels of performance
to super coherent
were the feelings.
It wasn't your intention.
I'm going to move that thing.
You had to have an
intention that was clear.
But it was driven by the
feeling of love or gratitude.
Very specific kind of high
virtues of the spiritual world
would drive it into the
state of complete coherence.
And boom, boom, boom.
Now, your brain really
starts essentially creating
new neural networks and
raising its functionality.
But it was the two together.
>>FREKE: So I would
say the essential idea
in the philosophy--
I call it "unividualism," which
is in my book, "Soul Story"--
is that literally
everything has evolved.
That's the fundamental mantra.
Everything is the realization of
potentiality in deeper and more
emergent ways.
That's the hypothesis, so
that you can see the simplest
things start first.
So I love the current
scientific vision.
13.8 billion years
ago, all there
is is hydrogen and helium.
And that has become you and me
here, talking to each other,
through a steady process of
the realization of greater
and greater potentialities.
That's what the universe is.
It's a self-realizing process.
So what's the most
emergent thing?
Well, actually, I think
the most emergent thing--
the scientists would agree--
is this experience
we're having of psyche,
of a non-material realm of
ideas, which we're all having.
Well, the "psyche,"
that's a Greek word.
It means "soul."
This is the soul.
So even scientists
would agree, oh, we've
gone from hydrogen to the soul.
We've gone from basic matter to
something not made of matter.
And where is it?
It doesn't even exist in space.
And then the highest
thing in that, I think,
is the attention, consciousness,
and the love element
that you mentioned.
What--
>>REGINA: Put
those two together,
and it's an incredibly
cohesive driving force.
>>FREKE: And what I think
this can explain is why.
That's what I'm
interested in, because it
seems to me the cutting edge.
We've arrived at
psyche, at soul.
And then we're conscious.
We've got intention.
And then what's happening is
that people are waking up--
and this is what the
deep spiritual message
is-- to the fact that
actually, they're
one with the whole universe.
They're moving from what
I call "individuals"
to "unividuals,"
who are individuals
conscious that everything's one.
And when that happens,
with this oneness,
there's this enormous love.
And that's what
motivates me and has
done since I was a little boy
is oh my god, I can wake up.
I'm one with universe, and
there's this incredible love.
So that looks to me like where
the whole process of evolution
has led.
So when you're sitting
there doing that process
and you're taking
loving attention--
>>REGINA: And you're watching
through a physical device
the effects on the screen--
>>FREKE: You're seeing
what that does--
>>REGINA: And then
you see the results.
>>FREKE: So you're seeing, ah.
So what we need to do is bring
the most emergent quality
in the universe, the
place it's all led to,
which is loving attention,
to all the issues we face.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: And that's the
kind of sociological message
of this evolutionary philosophy.
It's like OK, this is
where we've got to.
We're changing from
individuals to "unividuals."
It's really happening a lot.
>>REGINA: And this is
hard for a lot of people,
because a lot of times, people
who are brought into especially
a lot of the Eastern
traditions, for example,
are taking comfort in the notion
that they're not individuated,
that they're just
a drop in the sea,
and want to go back to becoming
just a drop in the hole,
without an individuated
I would say
not only consciousness but
sense of responsibility
and everything else.
>>FREKE: OK.
So I said, I'm asking
science to move,
and I'm asking
spirituality to move.
So with science,
what I'm saying is,
look, with the current
evolutionary story, which
is immense, it goes up
to the evolution of life.
And then there's
this side effect
we call the "soul," the psyche.
I'm saying to
science, no, no, no.
There's a whole other
phase of evolution,
which is the evolution of
the soul, which spirituality
has always been about.
Don't end the story.
The story's one story.
It reaches further.
If we can see that, then we
can make it one understanding.
Then to spirituality,
most ancient spirituality
works with the myth of the fall.
Everything was great, and
then we fell into life.
We're trapped in the body.
The life is an illusion.
It's a bad thing.
Even your individuality is in
the way of you, like a drop,
going back to the ocean--
totally anti-life.
It's a negative view.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
>>FREKE: It's just an old view.
>>FREKE: There was a
time it was cutting-edge.
By getting rid of
that idea of the fall
and replacing it with this
beautiful optimistic story
of evolution, of emergence--
>>REGINA: But not evolution
as we know it from Darwinism.
>>FREKE: Darwinism--
>>REGINA: Darwinism--
>>FREKE: Darwinism
and also Wallace,
it was incredible insight that
what they saw was all of life
had evolved from a simple cell.
What a vision.
How that happens, we're
still working it out
and all the rest of it.
But it looks like it's happened.
What a mind-blowing vision.
All of life is one thing.
And then 100 years ago, with
big bang theory, oh my god.
There's a whole 10 billion
years before that, in which
the whole universe has evolved.
But there's no
Darwinism in then.
That's a different process.
>>REGINA: Right.
But then there are
the ancient mysteries.
It's everything evolved once a
template was set into motion.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That gets
more complicated then.
>>FREKE: It does.
And my own understanding
of how that process works
is to do with the
nature of time.
So when I study time
experientially, as well as
philosophically,
I look at it now.
And I go, oh, it's interesting.
Every moment I've
ever experienced
has got two qualities.
One, it realizes a
new potentiality,
because that's what
the universe is.
It's always realizing,
oh, this is new.
Never had this before.
Great.
And also-- and this
is the key bit--
every moment includes within
it implicitly everything that's
ever happened so that without
you inviting me to have
this conversation, without me
flying from England, without us
learning to speak English, the
evolution of the human form,
the big bang,
everything that's ever
happened to us or
in the universe
is implicit in this moment.
So the past hasn't passed.
The past has accumulated.
There's more and
more and more of it.
And this is, I think, what
Rupert Sheldrake is onto,
with the idea of the
presence of the past,
that everything that's happening
is the habits of nature.
>>REGINA: It's
informing the field.
>>FREKE: It's informing
what's happening now,
because the past is
actually present.
So the template, I think,
is itself evolving.
And that template is the past.
And quite possibly, my own
intuition would be probably
even with the beginning
of this universe,
there was already the past
of other universes, which
is why the great
puzzle is, how come
everything set up so perfectly
for us when it starts?
And I think the answer
is because it's not
the first universe.
So the template
itself is the past,
and we're creating
that template now.
You're changing my thoughts.
I'm changing your thoughts.
People who are
listening to this,
we're all moving together.
So as the past accumulates,
we're all growing.
That's the soul evolution.
Well, that's what
all evolution is.
But for us, it's happening
on this non-material level
of psyche, of soul.
>>REGINA: So you made
mention of something
at the beginning of
the conversation,
that you've been asking
these questions since you
were a child.
But you actually had
an event as a child.
Let's just get into
that so people know what
spawned all of this in you.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
So we're talking
about ideas here.
I'm a philosopher.
I love ideas.
But actually,
underneath all of that,
I'm a love junkie, because what
happened to me that started me
off on this, when I
was a kid, life always
seemed profoundly mysterious.
It still does.
I wake up with it every morning.
What is this thing?
What shall I do with it?
Who am I?
All of those-- and I had
this as a little boy.
And I couldn't understand
why all the grown-ups weren't
asking that question.
I still don't understand why all
the grown-ups aren't asking--
>>REGINA: Now that
you are kind of one?
>>FREKE: Kind of one, yeah.
And something happened to
me, just sitting on a hill,
looking at this little town
I grew up in in England,
in the southwest.
And I experienced what I now
think of as being deep awake.
There was a shift in me,
and the world came to life.
And there was this profound
oneness with everything.
The sensuality was
just turned up.
And the biggest thing I
remember very vividly,
because I actually wrote about
it straightaway, as well,
as a boy, was this
enormous love.
Now, I now know this is a
common experience that people
have been experiencing this--
>>REGINA: Some would call
it "kundalini awakening"
or any number of names.
>>FREKE: All these different
names and in different flavors.
But it's fundamentally
this, oh, it's all one.
And there's this love.
So my life really has
been followed from that.
It's been like, what happened?
How can I get back there?
How can I understand it?
How can I cultivate it?
And then how can I share it?
>>REGINA: So have you
gotten back there?
>>FREKE: All the time, but not
in some oh, I'm enlightened--
>>REGINA: Not in this
profound, out of control, way.
>>FREKE: One thing I'm
not comfortable with is
the idea that we arrive at an
end place, where we're done.
Oh, tick.
I've got the hat,
got the T-shirt.
I'm there.
For me, it's evolutionary.
So it gets deeper.
It's not linear.
Life throws up challenges,
and Tim is still Tim.
So still that little
boy-- now, he's nearly 60.
And he's got flaws and problems
and things he works with,
like everyone else.
And that seems to
be true of everyone.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I haven't met an exception yet.
>>FREKE: Exactly.
And that's key.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: So the
way I look at it is
that I'm waking up to this
oneness, but through Tim.
And Tim's not in the way.
There's no ego in me
trying to stop me,
which I used to believe,
because that's what I was told.
It doesn't look like that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no.
>>FREKE: It looks the opposite.
It looks like as Tim evolves,
he can support this deeper
realization.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: And that's
what I need to do.
I need to just keep evolving
and keep going deeper.
>>REGINA: And like you say, the
story that much of the world
has bought into, much
of the Western world
in the Judeo-Christian beliefs
and Islamic beliefs, as well,
often does have to do
with this fall of sorts,
this state of flawed and evil as
the natural state of humankind.
And then you go to
the new age community,
where, no, we're all angels that
have simply chosen to reflect
ourselves in this experience.
These are poles apart.
These are worlds apart.
>>FREKE: They are.
And my own feeling is I
think they're both wrong.
>>REGINA: Yes.
We chose to incarnate
into these vehicles.
>>FREKE: We're moving
in and out of life.
I do think that.
And I think we can understand
that really rationally
in a way that fits with science.
And maybe we'll have a
chance to talk about that--
>>REGINA: Yes, we are going to--
>>FREKE: Because I
think that's important.
But I also think the
overall arc is evolutionary.
So although there's a sense
in which, oh, I'm back here,
and this is a material state.
So that's in a sense a fall.
Overall, the arc
is moving forward.
And Tim is becoming more,
because the past accumulates.
So you're meeting
everything I've ever been.
I'm meeting everything
you've ever been.
So there's always more.
And so it's very optimistic.
It's full of hope.
And my experience of waking up
when I was 12 and every time it
happens ever since is that
there's a lot of hope there.
Despite all the terrible
suffering-- and god
knows there's enough--
there's a fundamental goodness
to this, because it's heading
always towards the good.
It wants to get better.
We all do.
It wants to evolve.
It wants to be more.
And that's what
redeems the suffering.
>>REGINA: Right.
We're in agreement on
that, and also that life
is to-- actually, I think
what gets lost in the mix
oftentimes is this serious
search for ourselves, for soul,
for meaning is that we forget
that the simple acts of joy
are really what allow that
connectedness within ourselves
to happen.
And we just kind of
toss that to the side,
because we think it means going
to the pub on a Friday night,
in the case of lot of
Brits, or whatever.
But just forgetting to connect
with the things that actually
bring a childlike joy brings
a very high and very coherent
state within us.
And so I want to start
talking about that.
Let's look at that from
you can talk about it
on a brain chemical point
of view or whatever.
Start stitching
science together.
What in your mind is the dance
between spirit and matter?
Let's just start at
the building blocks.
>>FREKE: I think that for
me, the way that I would
use these words-- and
people use the words
in lots of different ways.
I try and hone them
back etymologically
to where they came from.
So I would see spirit or
"essence" from "esse," "to be,"
the Latin.
It's "being."
So there is a
formless potentiality
which is realizing itself as
this evolving flow of form.
So there's something
timeless appearing as time.
There's something
formless evolving as form.
And it evolves in this
ever more emergent way.
So it starts as information,
which becomes matter.
So that's what
physics is studying.
And then that will
evolve over 10,000 years,
until we reach life.
That's what biology is studying.
And that's immense.
Eventually, biology will reach
the point where it's sentient.
It can read light,
so it can see.
It can read vibrations in
the air, so it can hear.
And it will become conscious.
It will know that it's doing it.
And that will evolve into
a whole other realm, which
is the realm of the imagination,
images, the psyche, the soul,
the mind, what the Sufis
call the "imaginal realms."
The Tibetans call
it the "bardos."
There's a whole realm
now we exist in,
which is non-material.
And that's what spirituality
has always studied.
So the dance is between all
of that, because all of that
exists right now.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
OK.
So I'd go back to
the very beginning
and ask one question there.
And it's probably because
it's a bent of mine
to think that way, which is,
going back to the beginning,
going back to the
logos in prima materia,
the way I've always viewed it
is that the logos informs prima
materia, just as an egg
is impregnated and turns
into a human being, that there
is information that informs
and then creates matter.
But you're saying
that the information
becomes the matter itself.
So logos becomes prima materia.
>>FREKE: I think so.
It's so interesting
that we can understand
that this solid matter, when we
get small enough, disappears.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's the primordial
soup of potential.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
And then we end up
with information.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: And what
does that mean?
Well, one of the ways that
you can see information
is in mathematics.
We understand science
with mathematics.
Well, what is mathematics?
Where did that come from?
What are numbers?
Why do they have these certain
relationships with each other,
which are fixed?
And in geometry, it's fixed.
It's like, oh, it's
already that way.
You could go through
forever with numbers,
and you keep finding prime
numbers, for instance.
So all of that
information-- this
was Pythagoras's great insight.
All of that information
arises instantly.
And yet it has no
physical correlate.
And then that will
inform the way
that hydrogen forms
or the quantum realm
starts bringing
that into existence,
which will then become
more and more complicated.
And the simple example is
that once you've got hydrogen
and then once you've got oxygen,
well, then you can have water.
But you can't have it before.
But now you can,
because that's H2O
and then on and on and on
and on until you've got us.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: And none of
that's gone anywhere.
It's all there.
And it feels like
the insight I'm
trying to explore as a way
of healing this great split
is to go, what if
everything is just this one
unfolding of potentiality?
And it's always based on the
past, becomes something new,
based on the past,
becomes something new.
And so the new is
always more emergent.
It's always greater in some way.
>>REGINA: And so the
notion of universal mind
that has its own intention
and its own evolution,
what does that mean?
What's that look like, that
the universe has its own mind?
>>FREKE: For me, if you went
back to my earlier books,
it would follow the fairly
standard spiritual idea, which
is this is all existing
in a great mind.
That goes right back
to ancient India.
This is the dream of
Brahmin, dream of God,
all of those ideas.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: Science has come
along and gone, no, no, no.
There's no justification.
How have you explained
anything by saying,
well, there's a big mind?
There's God at the beginning.
You've just invented something.
Where did that come from?
What is that?
Where's that?
And as I've got older, I've had
to take that more seriously.
It feels like,
yeah, they're right.
They're right.
So I have a different
suggestion that I'm exploring,
which is instead of taking the
big mind, the oneness, the god,
love, the intelligence,
the super intelligence,
putting that at the beginning,
I think we need to put it--
it's not where it's come from.
I think it's where it's going.
I think that big mind,
which I experience--
I experienced it as a
little boy when I was 12.
That's how I experienced it.
Oh, this is God.
I think that's evolving.
I think that's what
the universe is.
It's a bit like I
was a little embryo,
but I evolved into
Tim and a soul.
And the same, where
the universe is
coming from this cosmic egg,
which was the original image
used for the big
bang by the person
who came up with the idea--
it's growing into
this cosmic mind.
So it's not where it started.
It's where it's
going, which is why
if you put God at
the beginning, it's
a bit problematic, because
why is there so much suffering
if there's a god of love and
all those classic questions.
And 125 million years of
dinosaurs, what was that about?
And all of these questions
which science asks-- and you
have to go, well, it does
look a bit more random,
doesn't it, really?
But if you go, no,
no, the key insight
is the more emergent, the
greater, comes later--
the greater comes later.
So it doesn't start with
the most amazing thing,
conscious oneness,
a god of love.
It's heading towards that.
And my own intuition as my
own experience of awakening
is that we are
contributing to that.
And in the same way that my
body is a communion of cells,
where all these little
individual cells have come
together and somehow,
they're all working together
and that one's being a nail
and that one's being a heart
and that one's being a brain and
they're forming a bigger thing,
in the same way, when
we wake up to oneness,
when we experience this
"unividuality," when we go,
oh, I'm an individual,
but I'm also the universe,
we come into a
communion of souls
and that that's what God is.
That's what this big mind is.
And my own feeling's
this little cell
here doesn't know what
it's like to be 10.
It hasn't got a clue.
And I don't know what
it's like to be God.
But I do think I know what
it's like to commune in God,
because that's
this enormous love.
And so as we come into this
resonance with each other,
as we make the next
big jump in evolution,
we are playing a role in
bringing this greater thing
that we serve into existence.
>>REGINA: And it has to be done
collaboratively, obviously.
It cannot happen--
>>FREKE: Completely.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So then we get to--
again, this is where
we start differing
from the Darwinian model,
in that this is not
happening in a movement
toward our mere survival.
It's happening in a movement
toward our increased
expression of creativity, of
the higher virtues, of love.
>>FREKE: Yeah, because
the Darwinian insight--
let's just say some form of
natural selection, however
that actually works.
That's by biology.
And it's great to
understand biology.
What I think we have to do is
evolution itself is evolving.
There was no DNA to
evolve the stars.
There was no natural selection.
None of that was happening.
It was a completely
different process.
All of that came into
existence with biology.
And what comes with life,
with the evolving of life,
comes death.
And that's fantastic,
because death is absolutely
essential for the evolution
of species of life,
because it clears away the old
ones, makes room for new ones.
And part of that is everyone's
struggling to survive.
And the ones that are good will.
Brilliant.
Now we've got species.
>>REGINA: But they die, too.
>>FREKE: And they die, too.
Yeah, they die, too.
But we're constantly renewing,
and it's got us to this.
It's amazing.
My own hypothesis,
my own thought,
is that evolution,
with the arriving
of the psyche or the soul, this
non-material realm that we're
discussing this in
now, it's no longer
about the evolution of species.
It's now about the
evolution of individuals.
And death is a disaster
for individuals,
which is why the psyche, being
non-material, doesn't doe.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: This is a
whole immaterial world.
So the immortal soul has
evolved from life and death,
but we've arrived
at that level now.
So we're no longer about
survival and species.
That's all biological stuff.
We need to do that, but that's
way down the emergent level.
Now we're on to much more
interesting or higher emergent
things, like virtue, like
love, like intelligence,
understanding,
wisdom, love wisdom.
>>REGINA: So how do you
frame the development
then of an individual soul?
>>FREKE: Right.
So I think what's happening
is that when we reach this--
and this has been
happening for a while.
But there is a whole immaterial
realm of information.
Maybe this is a really
simple analogy, but it helps.
If you get that idea that
physics has shown us,
that everything starts
with information,
so everything is
evolving information.
This is information
on this level.
on the soul level.
And then you can take a
really simple analogy,
because we now create virtual
realities with information.
And one of the things which
is obvious with computers
is if you put your information
just on the computer
and the computer dies,
you lose the information.
So we don't do that.
We keep the information locally
on the computer and non-locally
on the cloud.
And what that means is
when the computer dies,
information's still there.
I think the universe has done
that with us, because right
now, you and I
exist as information
on the biological level.
And we exist on
the psyche or soul
level as non-material
information, which
means when the body dies, the
information is still there.
So I would phrase the life after
death question in this way,
that what I think
spirituality is saying
is when the body dies, our
experience of sensation
will stop, because
that's a body experience.
But the experience we're
having of this other realm,
of imagination, of
soul, that doesn't stop.
And we go deeper into what
the Australian indigenous
people call the "dreaming,"
the bardos, the Duat.
There are 1,000 names for it.
Just like we do in dreams, when
we withdraw our sensations,
we go deeper into that realm.
Same when the body
dies-- that will cease,
but the imagination continues.
And what I love about studying
near-death experiences
is they look like these
most amazing dreams.
And I think they
are, but not unreal.
We think of dreams as that,
but they're not unreal.
It's actually the most
emergent level of reality.
That's the latest
thing to emerge
so that we can continue in
that imaginal realm for a bit.
And then I suspect
we have to re-engage
with the biological realm.
>>REGINA: Well, that's what
I was just going to ask next,
because that's what everyone
listening to this right
now at this point,
most people will
be asking that question
next is the re-engagement
or what is often
called "reincarnation."
>>FREKE: Reincarnation or the
transmigration of the soul--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Exactly--
>>FREKE: In the
Pythagoras transition--
>>REGINA: Which just
makes logical sense.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It may not be
answered to by science directly,
although it should by now.
>>FREKE: I think the
problem for science
is it can't engage at
the moment with this idea
that soul is a level of
information in its own right.
But once you get that--
>>REGINA: I know.
That is a big problem--
>>FREKE: Then you can see, OK.
So here's this information like
on the cloud, let's imagine.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: Think of
the information
being downloaded from the
cloud back onto a computer.
It's still on the
cloud, but it's
re-engaged with a new computer.
So when you update
your computer,
you're like, oh,
that one's finished.
>>REGINA: You still have
the old operating language.
>>FREKE: The stuff's there.
And then you--
>>REGINA: And that
becomes your subconscious.
>>FREKE: And then you can
operate on it physically,
just like I can operate
on it like this.
And the brain becomes much
more like an interface--
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly--
>>FREKE: Between
these two levels.
And then essentially
what you are,
what's really happening--
oh, we're these bodies,
and they're beautiful
and amazing.
And they do body stuff.
But essentially, what
you and I are are souls.
We're information on
this non-material level.
And what we're doing here is
using the body to connect.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And so I have this
question here.
At what point do you think
it will become, quote,
"scientifically validated," when
you have the bodies and bodies
of work, such as that of
Ian Stevenson at University
of Virginia and
some of his proteges
and so forth that have
taken thousands of cases
of little kids,
in particular, who
have very clear
remembrance of past lives,
right down to having the same
cigarette preferences at five
years old that they
had sometime back
or knowing all of the details
of these incredible stories?
At what point--
>>FREKE: When will that
be taken seriously?
>>REGINA: At what
point is there going
to be enough mass for
science to actually recognize
this is a scientific study?
>>FREKE: My guess in all honesty
is that it will actually not
be that way.
The thing that
will change is when
there is a new philosophy--
maybe I'm saying that
because I'm a philosopher.
But it feels like
once scientists
can go, oh, that
could be true, then
they'll look at the
information and go, wow.
There's loads of information.
At the moment, the problem
is, as I found recently--
>>REGINA: There's no interface--
>>FREKE: With the
neuroscientists,
they're not listening.
They don't even look, because
it just can't be true for them,
because reality goes to there.
And then once it goes to this
immaterial realm, which is
actually where they function--
they're brilliant in
that non-material realm
because that's where
all thought is--
they don't see that as real.
They see that as some sort
of strange illusion, which
is crazy, because it's the
most real thing we know.
>>REGINA: What's
interesting about that,
I've noticed,
because I know some
of these high-profile
physicists, for example,
most of them are
deeply religious.
>>FREKE: Yeah, that
can happen, too.
And you get this split
personality thing going.
>>REGINA: So they
can't reconcile it
in their own lives.
>>FREKE: No.
>>REGINA: How can this
be reconciled at large,
because I've always found
it the oddest phenomenon?
>>FREKE: See, the
history of science,
the reason it's
been so successful--
and it was brilliant.
The amount of scientific
knowledge that's
been accumulated in the last 300
years or the last 50 or last 10
is just so impressive.
And it's done that primarily
because it's done two things.
One, it's used a method which
goes, let's look at sensation.
Well, it's already limited
it, because our experience
is of sensation but also
not, of imagination.
We've got two experiences.
But it's going, let's do
this in only the sensation,
which it does.
And then let's study
things that can repeat,
so we can check them.
Well, physics, the
least emergent form,
the earliest form of existence,
it repeats really well.
If I pick up this--
I'm not going to
do it, obviously.
But I pick it up and
drop it, it will fall.
If I do it, it'll fall again.
It's very repeatable.
>>REGINA: You like
repeatable data.
>>FREKE: Yeah, because
you can study that.
But the more emergent levels
are more and more creative.
So you can just about
study in biology,
but it's more
difficult. But trying
to predict what you're
going to say to me next
is next to impossible.
Well, it is impossible.
So you're on such
a creative level
now, the method which goes,
let's just repeat it and check
it, it doesn't work, which is
why so much of the research
is difficult to do because
the scientific method no
longer works.
That doesn't mean
this is unreal.
It just means it's on a more
emergent level of creativity.
>>REGINA: It's true.
And this is bringing to
mind, I did an interview
for my own site recently
with a man named Paul Hynek.
Now, there's a huge
show sweeping cable
TV in America called
"Project Blue Book."
"Project Blue Book"
has to do with
military classified
documents regarding
the government and
interfaces that
were studied between UFOs
and extraterrestrials
and human beings.
And it was a very
big deal in its day.
So now History Channel has
made this into a series,
basically starting the
process of declassification
to the public.
Yes, there have
been experiences.
We're just rolling
it out slowly.
But the central character is a
man named Dr. Allen Hynek, who
was an astrophysicist and an
astronomer teaching at Ohio
State University, I believe.
And at the end, when I
was interviewing his son,
Paul Hynek, talking
about what this man was
like, what their
lives were like,
and so forth because he
was tasked with essentially
disproving everything to
the public to make them
doubt the experiences
they'd had--
the government,
the military, was
hiring him to explain away
everything people really
seriously believed they were
interfacing with and in fact
were, certainly some
of the time, anyway.
And so at the very
end of the interview,
I was asking him
something about his dad.
It just kind of was random,
and then it made sense.
His dad was a scientist,
but he was open-minded.
He wanted the truth.
He wanted explanation.
And that's what he
was tasked with--
very logical.
But he was also a
Rosicrucian, who
understands the vastness of
the cosmic interface of life.
And so to me, it was
a beautiful example
of where in his own
being, he didn't fight
those two parts of himself.
It actually brought
those two parts together
to be able to, I think,
create an inspirational story
for humanity, that we can
embrace this new story.
>>FREKE: That's
definitely what we need.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: And it is
emerging, like I said.
And I think it will be
huge when it arrives.
I don't think we're
there yet, but I
think we've got a blueprint.
I obviously think this
evolutionary story
I've been articulating
is a huge part of that.
And then, of course,
actually, what matters
is the practical implications--
>>REGINA: The practical--
>>FREKE: Which is how do we
then use that to wake up.
How can we experience this
oneness with the universe?
How can we bring
loving attention
to the problems we now face
individually, socially?
How can we actually wake
up that we're alive,
that this amazing thing
is happening to us?
>>REGINA: And yet
at the same time,
all these people on the
planet are experiencing
incredible angst right now.
>>FREKE: Sure.
>>REGINA: A lot of tension,
more polarization--
I wrote a stat down here.
What is it?
In the past century, wars
have killed about 187 million
human beings on this planet.
So we look at that
and think, jeez,
that sounds like the Vedic
version of devolution,
like a really
downward Yuga cycle.
But on the other hand, we're
all experiencing this thing
you're talking about, too.
>>FREKE: We are.
And you know what?
We need to be careful
with these statistics,
because actually,
things have got--
as a historian,
so many people die
because there's so many of us.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: But statistically,
in terms of your likelihood
to die, it's gone down
and down and down.
The changes I've seen
in my own lifetime,
it's so much better,
where poverty is down.
Child mortality is done.
What we've done, we should
feel so proud of ourselves.
>>REGINA: We should, except for
the fact we keep picking wars.
We keep starting them
all over the planet.
>>FREKE: Wars?
>>REGINA: Wars.
>>FREKE: There's never
been so few wars.
>>REGINA: These ridiculous
struggles with each other.
>>FREKE: What's happened,
I think, is actually,
we've become sensitive
to how crazy wars are.
>>REGINA: Maybe that's it.
Maybe it's just that
we're noticing them more,
you're saying?
>>FREKE: I'm an Englishman.
My dad was in the
Second World War.
The whole planet went up.
I've never been in a war.
Probably, I'm the only
generation of Englishmen
that that's been true for,
because the rest of history
is just war, war, war.
Europe has had peace.
That's never happened before.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: Huge changes-- we
are a man and a woman talking
as equals.
Wow.
Historically, that is--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
No, it's all true--
>>FREKE: Unbelievable.
>>REGINA: But we're fed a
stream of that information
all the time, of how
dangerous it is out there
and how there's always other.
And we have to be
prepared to fund something
so we can fight other.
>>FREKE: And some of
that's manipulation.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>FREKE: Some of
it's just we have
a natural biological
propensity, quite rightly,
to look for the what's wrong.
Where is the danger?
So part of the job,
I think, for people
like ourselves is to go
out and go, you know what?
We don't want any war.
And we want to get
rid of these things.
But within the context of
history, we're doing good.
Now--
>>REGINA: That's good to say--
>>FREKE: There are new problems
coming, which could be huge.
We need to pay those attention.
But first of all, let's
just go, well done.
Thank you to our ancestors.
They got us here.
Now, how can we take it to
the next level of evolution?
>>REGINA: So what
do you perceive
as the threat on
the horizon that we
need to start overcoming
through this evolution?
>>FREKE: Well, probably what's
going happen with the climate
is the most likely thing.
I think it's still
up in the air.
But the people in the know
seem pretty concerned,
and we should take that
seriously, I think,
and listen to what
they have to say.
And the scale of the problem--
I'm aware that we can,
again, exaggerate.
When I was young, I
thought the whole world
was going to be destroyed
by nuclear weapons.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: But we've got through,
but it looked like that.
And we were all very
worried and still should be.
But we've held it together.
And my hope is that we
can pay loving attention
to these problems.
And the key, it
feels like, look,
let's wake up to what we are.
We are the universe.
We are immortal souls on this
deeply meaningful journey,
in which we are part
of the whole thing.
And if we can really
own what existence is,
see it for what it is, and work
together, we're so creative.
>>REGINA: We are indeed.
So let's look at this--
>>FREKE: And we've
got God on our side.
>>REGINA: There we go.
We're going to get to
your definition of "God."
>>FREKE: And it's helping us.
>>REGINA: Yes.
We'll get around to that
toward the very end here.
But meanwhile, we look around.
And I talk about this
in a lot of shows,
because it's where people
are experiencing life,
on the ground, right?
>>FREKE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And on
the ground, there
are these increased tensions and
anxieties right now globally.
It's happening globally.
How do you perceive this window
we're in and its function?
Everyone has a different
point of view on it.
I happen to think it's a
good thing, because it's
going to crack open a
part of ourselves that
can become more emergent.
But everyone has
a point of view.
So what is yours?
>>FREKE: Well, maybe like
you, I'm inherently optimistic
and I hope not without reason.
Maybe it's my
nature, but there's
something about the deep
awake state and that love
that just gives me hope.
Now, it doesn't mean that
bad things can't happen.
They do, all the time.
It doesn't mean we couldn't
go through a really difficult
patch.
We really could.
But my feeling is that
alongside it, like you said,
there's this undercurrent
of awakening.
Here are obvious things.
I love the obvious, and
we miss them sometimes.
There has never been a time
in the whole of history
where so many people have
cared about other human beings
in other places in the world
they'll never ever meet.
Why?
>>REGINA: Well, true.
They had no means of connection.
>>FREKE: They had no means.
But even if they
could have done,
they hated their neighbors.
They had a connection with them.
>>REGINA: Travel wars.
>>FREKE: They hated them,
and they stole from them
and pirated them and
warred with them forever.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
When I look at that, yeah.
>>FREKE: That's a huge
shift in compassion.
People genuinely care about--
when the Iraq War
happened, people
came out to say no to this
war across the whole planet.
They didn't stop it, but when
has that ever, ever happened?
These are huge.
>>REGINA: Well,
I agree with you.
When you think that only
100, 200 years ago--
less than that in America.
You could go back
even 50 years--
people would show up for public
hangings as entertainment,
with dull eyes.
We are moving beyond that.
And that's what gives me hope.
>>FREKE: So we've done
that with human beings.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: So we've got a sense of
oneness emerging with humanity.
And also behind that, there's
a sense of oneness with nature.
So there's a whole issue
about how we treat nature,
but huge numbers
of people care now.
And they care about
the polar bear.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: Why?
Why would a human being
care about a bear that
would like to rip it to shreds?
But we do, because we
identify with something
bigger than ourselves.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And the younger generation
hugely concerned
about not only environmental
factors of the consumption
of animals, for example--
and I'm not getting on
any soapbox any which way.
It's veganism now--
>>FREKE: Veganism, huge--
>>REGINA: Is really massive.
We're noticing this all over
the world, when I travel,
that menus all
over the world now
have vegan cuisine offerings.
That wasn't there even
two or three years ago.
And a lot of it's being driven
by the younger generation.
One of my past lives here was
I had a cooking show on PBS,
a vegetarian cooking
show, for quite a while
and was vegetarian for 20 years.
And at that time, the
kids were driving it.
And the parents would write
in and ask what to do,
because their kids had refused
to eat animals any longer.
Now, the kids are saying, I'm
not having any butter or eggs.
I'm out.
And so it's just refining
and refining itself.
And there is a quality
to that that you
see this communality
rising, this
want for really healthy sources
of their vegetables and foods
that have been untampered
with by chemicals.
It's really quite beautiful.
And it's becoming
not ubiquitous yet,
but it's strengthening
in numbers rapidly.
>>FREKE: That's what I
mean by the transformation
of an individual
into a "unividual."
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: And the deeper
sense-- nowhere near as big,
but it's definitely there.
And I get to see it when
I travel, for sure--
is that underneath it, there
are more and more people
that when I go out now and
I go, on the deepest level,
we're one with the
universe, most people nod.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FREKE: 20 years ago,
people looked puzzled.
This shift is happening.
And our job is to make
the shift ourselves,
because it's together, and
to support each other both
becoming more individual--
not less, more individual--
because the more
individual we become,
the more we think for ourselves,
the more we are ourselves,
the more conscious we are.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I couldn't agree more.
>>FREKE: We have
to use doubt, which
is what makes us
conscious, because we all
grow up through a culture.
And then we have to wake up from
that culture by doubting it.
It doesn't mean we dismiss it.
It just means we
step out from it
and go, oh, what
do I make of that?
I grew up a Catholic.
What do I make of that?
I grew up a Muslim.
I grew up a secular atheist.
What do I make of that?
And then you can make it
your own, if it feels right.
Or you move on.
But either way,
you've individuated.
You're an individual.
You've become a free soul.
You're no longer just enmeshed
in this unconscious collective.
If you can do that
enough, then you
can become conscious
of the oneness.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: And then
you "unividuate"
from individuating.
And what's happened
to us collectively
in our culture in
the West is we've
been through an age
of individualism.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: And it's been great.
We don't wear the
same clothes anymore.
We do our own thing.
It's OK we're different.
Sexuality can be whatever
you want it to be.
It's been a beautiful thing,
but it's come with problems.
And we've become lonely.
We're cut off from each other.
Community, which
was unconscious,
is just kind of disappearing.
We now need to consciously
bring that back.
So it's no longer
unconscious community.
It's conscious community.
It's no longer
unconscious oneness.
It's conscious oneness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: And we do that by going
deeper into our individuality,
because that's
beautiful, but then going
beyond it to something
bigger than ourselves.
>>REGINA: And that's what my
husband writes about and speaks
about and is his
passion in life is
this development of our
unique divine genius
in every human being,
which moves beyond gender.
It moves beyond everything.
It's, what is that thing that
you've come to express in life?
And how do you join
hands together then
and express your
genius with each other
to create complex, diverse,
emergent communities,
spiritually emergent
communities?
And I think that's very
similar to the vision you have.
>>FREKE: It really is.
And what I can offer
hopefully with the philosophy,
this evolutionary philosophy,
is go, you know that thing which
absolutely you intuitively
know that to be true, I think,
that's inherent to the
nature of the universe,
because the whole universe,
it doesn't have a purpose.
It is a purpose,
because what it is
is the realization
of potentiality
in ever more emergent ways.
That's what it is.
So what are you?
Well, you're that.
So what's your purpose?
Well, to realize your
deepest potentialities
in more and more
emergent ways and keep
growing into something more.
And that's the same insight that
I think you're talking about.
There's the genius.
There's what you've come.
There's the opportunity--
>>REGINA: Uniquely equipped
with desire to offer.
>>FREKE: And you know
that's your purpose.
And it will have
resonances with others.
We all need to wake
up to our oneness.
We all need to
express that love.
But you're doing it in this
way, I'm doing it in that way,
and that's governed by our past.
Our character, the
character of our soul,
is made of everything
that we've experienced.
And that enables me to do
things that others can't do,
enables you to do
things that I can't do,
and that's true for all of us.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's what makes
a rich and complex society.
And that's been
kind of stripped out
of us in the industrial age.
It kind of killed that spirit.
But now, we're
emerging from that age.
And like you say and
many people said,
we went from that to
the information age.
And now, we're moving
even beyond that,
into this age of a much more
fine spiritual development.
And so I want to
read this from you.
This is one of your quotes.
And then we get into the nature
of God in our last few minutes
here.
And then I have one final
question that still stumps me.
It says, "In the
after-death state,
we come together in
the communion of souls
to create God."
And you're saying,
essentially, we come together.
And the communion of
these souls is God.
>>FREKE: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's talk about
that, implications of that.
>>FREKE: So we
mentioned earlier that
like the community of
cells forms the body,
that souls come together.
And I think that's
happening now.
I think as we sit here
resonating, it's happening.
But in a very deep way, I
think it happens after death.
So one of the
things which people
report of the
near-death experience
is this light, a love light.
And you can go right back to
the "Tibetan Book of the Dead,"
and they're talking
about it there.
And one of the translations
of the name for it
there is beautiful.
They call it the "luminosity
of potentiality."
So it's the formless
potential, and there it is.
Now, the old idea that I
think you mentioned earlier
in a different context is,
oh, this is all a mistake.
So dissolve back into it,
like a drop into the ocean.
And if you don't think about
it too much, it's quite nice.
You're like, oh, yeah,
I'll dissolve into it.
That sounds nice,
until you think, oh,
that means everything I've
ever been is a waste of time.
>>REGINA: No, it's not rational.
>>FREKE: It doesn't
mean anything,
that life is pointless.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: Better if
it never happened.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>FREKE: So my take on it
is is that the insight just
needs flipping and that
actually, what's happening
is that we are
filaments in that light.
There's a wonderful
near-death experience
which a lady shared for
me when I talked once.
And she said, what I saw in
my near-death experience was
the light and then souls,
which the image was
of little sparks going up to
the light and falling away.
So what I'm suggesting is the
light is all those sparks.
As we wake up-- so at death,
we can go into that conscious
oneness, that enormous
love, that bliss,
and be there for a bit, but
not by dissolving into it,
but by staying
individual within it--
>>REGINA: I agree
with you on that--
>>FREKE: And therefore
being conscious within it.
>>REGINA: Otherwise,
you would not
have the ability to even
come back into this continuum
and do it again.
And so tell us what
you believe this part
of the game of our
evolutionary path
is all about, when we're looking
at coming back into a body,
back where time,
for most people,
comes up as their
greatest enemy,
because nothing's happening.
We think it.
We desire it.
We can create it and believe it.
And then we sit
and wait and wait
and wait for it to manifest
into the physical reality.
And many people never
have that satisfaction.
Some people can do it like that.
So as a species, I think people
tend to view time as an enemy,
so to speak.
And then the resistance
of difference in life,
the differences on the planet--
so how does that play
out in your mind?
And at what point do we stop
playing that part of it out?
>>FREKE: For me,
time is what life is.
It's what existence is.
It's the unfolding of time.
That's all we ever experience.
And because of the presence of
the past that's accumulating,
there's this what
I call "pastivity,"
which is like gravity.
So the past keeps
everything the same.
That's a jolly good thing.
It means my cup is still here.
The desk is still here.
That's good.
But it's also a negative part.
It's the habits of the universe.
So it's also the habits of Tim.
Some of those are
good habits, some not.
Some hold me back.
Some are things which
happened to me earlier
that stopped me
being all I could.
So this desk is going
to stay the desk,
but I can change my soul.
So what I'm working with is
the character of my soul.
And the great transformative
work is to find the wounds
and turn them into wisdom.
It's to take the stuff which
is lead and holding us back
and, like the
alchemists, turn it
into gold, as a gift to life.
So what we're doing
here is because we
are made of the past, we're in
a process of soul formation.
We are forming ourselves.
In every moment,
we form ourselves.
This conversation is
now part of who we are.
So we have the choice
how do we form ourselves.
And if we can form ourselves
in the most emergent way,
it's better for us.
We become more conscious.
There's more joy.
There's more creativity.
And it's better
for everyone else,
because we can
give to existence.
And also, I think
when we die, we're
able to enter into--
well, now, before we die,
we're able to enter into
that oneness of love
much more deeply.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
And I would probably
add one thing to it,
and that is the
notion of patience.
That's probably the
virtue that's most needed,
beyond every other one.
I put kindness as the
number one virtue.
But patience I would
say is incredible,
because then if you can be
patient with how time flows
through and how these habits
dissolve or resist, persist,
and so forth, then we start
learning to have I always
call it "faith in
Life" with the big L,
what our soul is really
propelling us toward.
But it takes patience.
And we lose so
much faith in life
because we lose patience that
it's not happening the way we'd
like to see it roll out.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
You're right.
I'm not very good at
patience, but you're right.
>>REGINA: I mean patience--
I'm horrible in traffic.
I'm not patient.
But in the big
picture, I'm patient.
>>FREKE: I'm OK with traffic.
It's the big picture
that I can't.
Here's the way it looks to me.
When I was 12 and I
woke up to the big love,
it's exactly the same as
when I experience it now.
It's just this love.
And when I say "love," I don't
mean just pink fluffy love.
I mean big, strong, robust love.
What changes is wisdom,
and that's the patience.
And patience is wisdom.
It's the knowledge that
everything takes time.
That's what it takes.
So to get from here to a more
emergent state, it takes time.
And it takes wisdom,
and it takes effort.
So I hope in these decades
since I've been 12,
even though the love
has stayed the same,
I hope I've become a little
bit wiser in how to love,
because the dilemma
we all face is we
don't just live in the
most emergent place.
We live with all of it.
So we live with matter.
We live with biology.
We live with all those less
emergent levels of humanity.
We live with people
who are living
in the Middle Ages,
who want to blow you up
because you're not a Muslim.
And we live with
fundamentalists.
We live with all of it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FREKE: And somehow,
we need to love that.
And that takes wisdom.
>>REGINA: It does take wisdom.
>>FREKE: And that
takes time to acquire.
>>REGINA: It takes patience.
>>FREKE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So my final
question is this,
because this is
the one part when
I think about what comes
first, always what comes first,
if you can even do that.
And you're saying it's
all emergent together.
And we can witness
the world around us.
This is what's emerged
from the human experience
and level of consciousness.
And I say, so where
did a rose come from?
>>FREKE: Where did
a rose come from?
>>REGINA: That
amount of perfection.
>>FREKE: I think to
me, what we have--
the--
>>REGINA: I know it's
a tough question.
>>FREKE: No, it's a
beautiful question.
I love the question,
because actually,
I think it's the
other way around.
I think what's happened is the
ability to appreciate beauty--
>>REGINA: Which is huge--
>>FREKE: Is what has emerged.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FREKE: And then we look
back at what was there,
which was functional, and we
go, oh, but it's beautiful.
I had an experience
the other day.
I was walking out
in the countryside,
and it was evening.
It was beautiful.
And I looked out, and
there right on the horizon
was the sun going
down, gorgeous.
And I looked around, and behind
me was the moon, just as big.
It was exquisite.
And then I looked at
the cows, and they just
weren't interested.
They were just eating.
They weren't looking around
at each other going, hey,
have you noticed
that sun and moon?
They weren't doing that.
They were just eating, because
they hadn't got to that place
yet where they
were going, can you
see that that thing that
gives us light is beautiful?
>>REGINA: Oh, I agree with you.
>>FREKE: And so
what I would suggest
is that the really interesting
thing-- or the arising
of the rose is amazing.
But it's the arising in
the soul of the ability
to see the beauty in creation.
>>REGINA: And to appreciate
it, because it doesn't
have any real functional use.
It's not functional.
It is a thing of
beauty in and of itself
that sprang from something.
And I think that it's beautiful.
Contemplating the
nature of a rose to me
is a very complex thing.
And we could probably go on and
ask questions back and forth
on many dimensions.
>>FREKE: That's the key.
>>REGINA: But the
point is what you just
said is very, very true.
Regardless of how a
rose was ever fashioned,
the point is we have the
ability to appreciate its beauty
for beauty's sake, symmetry
for symmetry's sake,
scent for scent's sake.
>>FREKE: It's so
wonderful that maybe not
with a rose, because the
rose has been fashioned
so much by human
beings-- but if you
take a beautiful natural flower
before there were human beings,
it's interesting to think, OK.
So that beauty was
there way before there
was a consciousness
going, wow look at that.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And so beauty is another
one of the noble truths
that I hold very high.
>>FREKE: It's a great
emerging quality.
>>REGINA: Kindness,
patience, beauty,
those are very high on my list.
>>FREKE: Me, too.
>>REGINA: And I think
they are yours, as well.
>>FREKE: The greatest
things come last.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So--
>>FREKE: Justice and
empathy, all of them.
>>REGINA: Well,
on that note, it's
been a really
wonderful conversation.
It's good to see you
in the flesh again.
We were trying to figure out.
It was a long time ago at-- what
was the name of the conference?
>>FREKE: Science
and Non-Duality.
>>REGINA: Science and
Non-Duality Conference
in Marin County,
Mauricio's conference.
So it's been a long time.
It's good to see you.
You haven't changed
a bit, and it's
nice to meet your
beautiful wife, who's
with you behind the
scenes here today.
So thanks again, Tim.
Lovely, and I hope your
book does really well,
because you are part of
stitching those stories
together for people.
And it's a hopeful one.
Again, Tim's book is
titled "Soul Story--
Evolution and the Purpose
of Life," which you
can find at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]